Ancient Faith Radio presents Homilies from All Saints, taken from the weekly sermons by Father Patrick Henry Reardon, priest at All Saints Orthodox Church in Chicago, and senior editor of Touchstone Magazine.
Here's Father Pat.
The epistle reading this morning, though, is not the usual one for our choose for Sunday.
It's a reading chosen for the feast of the 40 martyrs of Armenia, the martyrs of Sebast.
We're frozen to death.
It seems entirely appropriate we should be keeping that feast this year in Chicago.
We left Chicago the other day.
The snow lull of the ground was bitter cold as in the 20s.
A few hours later, I landed in San Jose, California, it was mid-70s.
I felt really stupid walking out with this hat on.
People really did stare at me.
40 Martyrs of Sabast.
That's why we have this epistle today.
The epistle begins by saying that we are surrounded by a great cloud of witnesses, the Nephos Martial.
Hear the word?
Martus in there is literally were surrounded by a great cloud of martyrs.
We should strike us all with a certain amount of sobriety, don't you think?
The reason why this word Martus is translated here as witness, the present passage, is its reference to the Old Testament saints.
who would not be martyrs in the usual liturgical sense.
That's why he's usually translated as witness here in this text.
The author has just finished chapter 11, which I've noticed comes right before chapter 12, which he has a long list of the champions of faith, Enoch, Noah, Abraham and Sarah,
Moses and his parents, Rahab, Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jefti, David, Samuel and the prophets, a list too long, the author says, to be inscribed in full.
Now that's the context of this epistle.
All the champions of the faith who've gone before us and from whom we inherit the faith.
This, with the author Hebrews, is the company of the saints, the cloud of witnesses.
who have gone before us.
They're those who lived the faith before us and handed the faith on to us.
But they didn't just go before us.
He says, we're surrounded by them.
We're in their company.
People go on in chapter 12 to describe what that means.
If you had any idea this morning that we just sort of came here by ourselves, we're all alone praising God.
That's ridiculous.
We're surrounded by the great company of the saints.
We'll come to that in point three this morning.
We're surrounded by them in the sense that we depend on them for our very existence.
They are our elders in the faith.
Just more remark now on three points with respect to this theme.
The principle of eldership, let's start there.
Number one, the principle of eldership itself.
The idea has been around for quite some time that all Christians are created equal, and that there's this spirit, profound spirit of democracy within the Christian church.
This is nobody, nobody prior to just a very recent time would ever have imagined such a thing.
St. Paul wrote to the Corinthians, I handed on to you what I also received.
That's called tradition.
It's handing on.
And you don't hand up, you hand down.
It's tradition.
Tradition is personal, meaning that it involves an I-thou relationship.
This I-thou relationship, however, is one of authority.
not a parody.
It involves an eldership.
In other words, the I speaks with authority and the you listens with respect.
St. Paul himself is a you before he's an I. I handed onto you that which I also received.
Paul himself received the tradition of the church and handed on.
Now, this principle of eldership means a tradition that speaks
with binding address.
These elders have authority over us.
We are defined by the tradition they hand onto us.
I believe we would never have lost the sight of this, except that we live in what Christopher Clausen has called a post-cultural age.
And I'll be talking about that through points, point two especially.
We live in a post-cultural age, which means that we really haven't inherited anything.
I look around at what passes for culture in 21st century American.
All I can do is sort of rip my hair out.
Well, I don't really have the task is already long progressed.
GK Chesterton, writing the beginning of the 20th century,
suggested the term aristocracy, pardon me, democracy of the dead.
By which he meant that, a person does not lose his vote simply because he happens to be dead.
That those who have died have an equal vote with us.
I suppose that may work well
In a secular society, I'm not even confident of that.
But I believe that Chesterton's democracy of the dead is woefully inadequate.
Because it suggests that we ourselves are the equals of those who've gone before us.
I find it impossible even to contemplate such a notion.
The very idea that I'm the equal of my father would never occur to me.
The idea that I'm the equal of my grandfather borders on blasphemy.
I would speak rather in the church of an aristocracy of the dead, meaning that the prophets, the apostles, and the church elders, the fathers of the church and their apostolic successors, hand over to us the faith once delivered to the saints.
And that's why the church speaks with binding authority.
Just the very notion that a church can speak with binding authority and lay down the rule for your life is something absolutely important to Americans.
Most Americans are not willing to concede to an institution that's 2,000 years old the authority over their lives.
But they don't really believe they belong to an institution that's 2,000 years old and in most cases they don't.
It says that we are not the equal of those who have gone before us.
They speak and we listen.
They form that great cloud of witnesses by whom we are surrounded.
It is from those witnesses, the prophets, the apostles, the church fathers.
What do we receive from them?
We receive our very identity as Christians.
We receive the sacred scriptures.
And along with the sacred scriptures, we receive an understanding of the sacred scriptures because, you see, just the handing on of the Bible is a very mixed blessing.
It's a very mixed blessing just to hand on the Bible because people have read into this Bible anything they will please.
It's important that when the Bible is handed on, an understanding of the Bible is handed on.
A body of doctrine, a tradition is handed on.
But while we receive the Bible as part of a package,
Not just a book we're free to make of what we would.
This is our Christian heritage, my brothers and sisters.
We receive as a gift from those who have gone before us in the faith, surrounded by great cloud of witnesses.
As we start with the Old Testament witnesses, the author of Hebrews, when he starts to list the Old Testament witnesses, begins with Enoch.
And tonight at Vespers, we will begin with Enoch.
And we'll go on tomorrow night with Noah and with Abraham and so forth.
And we will follow the crowd of witnesses as they're enunciated in the epistle to the Hebrews in the book of Ben Sirach.
Point two, and inheritance can be lost.
Actually, it can be squandered.
And this is the reason, surely,
that immediately after talking about the great cloud of witnesses, the author Hebrews goes on to speak of Esau.
Same chapter.
He says Esau was a profane person who for one morsel of food sold his birthright.
You see, Esau is not included in that great cloud of witnesses.
Indeed, he is held up as an example of a man who deliberately put himself outside the ownership of tradition.
What was Esau's problem?
Well, I don't know.
I think the psychologists would want to say, well, you know, he wasn't his mother's favorite.
And that may have something to do with that.
I don't know.
I'm well instructed in these matters.
I do see in Esau an elementary lack
of self-control, or rather lack of elementary self-control.
As a rugged outdoorsman, perhaps he thought of himself as a man of tough discipline.
Clearly, however, the very opposite was true.
Esau was unable to control his appetite long enough for a meal to be prepared for him.
Like a nursing infant,
He insisted on being fed right now, capital R, capital N, as though he was otherwise parish.
He wants what he wants, what he wants it.
That's the perfect way to destroy a culture.
Look, he says, I'm about to die.
So what is this birthright to me?
A little exaggeration there, he's about to die.
Undisciplined, he saw, that is to say,
gave up his inheritance for a slight but instant gratification.
He was not defined by tradition.
For this reason, we could speak of Esau as a self-made man.
And we're surrounded in 21st century America by self-made men.
Esau was a right now man.
He said, what's happening now, man?
He did not derive his identity as a free and generous request for the past.
He equated, rather, by his independence and his self-determination in the present.
He saw deliberately alienating himself from what he could and should have been, and from what he could and should have been able to head on to his posterity.
His sin consisted in separating himself from the tradition.
The transmission of an intergenerational inheritance received through an eldership.
The New Testament presumes that the entire experience of being a Christian amounts to this.
Esau was very modern in the sense that he was a quantitative man.
If you can measure it, it has value.
If you're not in control of it and you can't measure it, then it doesn't have value.
So Esau thought an inheritance could be bought and sold.
And having lost his birthright for a bowl of soup, he planned to gain his blessing with a plate of venison.
Esau did not understand the difference between an inheritance and a commodity.
You see contemporary American religion is very much a commodity.
It is very definitely consumer driven.
That's why the music is constantly changed, the message is constantly changed, the style is constantly changed, everything constantly changed.
It's consumer driven.
Whatever people want, that's what will give you the Jesus label on it.
Esau imagined he could be a cultured person by reason of what he could purchase.
He fasted he could prove his love of culture by the seasonal purchase of opera tickets or charter membership in the art gallery.
I know people who do that and are completely uncultured, absolutely totally uncultured people, but they have this facade that I can purchase everything that certain things that look cultural.
ESO did not understand that living culture does not belong to us.
Rather, we belong to it.
We cannot buy it for price.
It must be given to us from the past through an eldership to which we willingly submit ourselves, thereby permitting that eldership to define us.
Esau understood nothing of this.
I've written about Esau quite a bit, whereas articles published here and there.
I've often referred to him as a modern man.
Someone wrote and asked me, why don't you call him a post-modern man?
And I said, I'm really not that far up yet.
I don't understand post-modernism.
In fact, I'm a little scared even to face it.
And given my age, I don't really have to.
Someone else will face it.
I do, however, think of Esau and Christopher Clousen's category of a post-cultural man.
taking that from Christopher Clausen's very fine book, Post-Cultural America.
Where he saw alive today, we would regularly recognize him and those who have bought the birthright for a bowl of post-cultural soup.
They subject themselves to the baleful influences of contemporary society.
Now sometime our orthodox
Service books really do need to be updated.
They truly do need to be updated.
When you stand in back, those of you who have stood in back, Mark, you've done that, repudiated all these heresies.
You had to repudiate rebellionism, historianism, Aryanism, and so forth.
Those aren't the heresies of today.
The heresies of today are post-culturalism.
The heresies of today are subjective truth, multiculturalism.
That's one of the worst.
Non-judgementalism.
Those are the heresies of today.
These folks subject themselves to the baleful influences, as they say, of contemporary society.
They've been exposed to the satanic notion, the truth is subjective.
If you have your truth, I have my truth.
Of course, the question I want to ask them is, is that true?
Perhaps the acid of politically correct language
has already corroded their critical faculties.
Unless they have kept a steady guard, they may already have accepted in some measure the nihilism and the chaos in that phenomenon that goes by the insidious name, multiculturalism.
And all that means is nobody has any culture.
It may be the case that they have in some ways been infected by the contemporary heresy of non-judgmentalism, the heresy described by Clausen as an egalitarian luck of self-confidence.
You see, such folk are only consumers.
They're not participants in a living culture.
they feel free to choose and to discard.
They, not the culture itself, remain sovereign.
They establish their own standards by their own preferences, their own choices, their own tastes.
And as consumers, they believe that the customer is always right.
This mentality permeates our entire
post-cultural era.
It's very easy to recognize the children of Islam.
Third, let's return to that great cloud of witnesses.
You see, this great cloud of witnesses is very much alive.
Our elders in the faith are still with us because they have bequeathed to us a living
breathing inheritance.
You see, one thing about a culture, by its very nature, it must be alive.
Antibiologists will tell you that.
The dead culture is not a culture.
What we've received is not a museum.
What we've received is the living inheritance.
The fathers of the church, the people who put the New Testament together,
who decided what gospels, what epistles go into the Bible.
Those men, the fathers of the church, from whom we receive the sacred scriptures and the understanding of the sacred scriptures.
If we walked into this building right now, we'd know exactly what was going on.
It would recognize everything that we do and we say as the faith they handed on to us.
They would not come in here and find a band
with drums and horns and heaven knows what else.
If you come in here and hear simple chants being done, the chants that they themselves painted onto us, the same liturgical text, the same sacred scriptures, and the same understanding of those scriptures.
This is the reason we surround ourselves with the images of these people in our place of worship.
This is one of the reasons why the Orthodox Church insists on iconography as a component of our worship.
We don't consider that optional.
The earliest examples of Christian churches, the very earliest we have, have walls surrounded with the images of the saints.
Back to the excavations at Deury Europus and Tiger River, the earliest churches are surrounded
A lot more pictures than we have here.
We're just getting started here.
The catacombs, second century chapel, the Capella Greca, and the catacombs of Rome.
Second century, 150.
The walls are surrounded with iconography.
Pictures from the Bible, pictures of the prophets, pictures of the apostles.
When we pray, we take our place with these elders in worship.
This is the reason that the epistle of the Hebrews in the same chapter 12 goes on to speak of our union with the elders and worship.
Listen to this description of Christian worship in Hebrews 12.
But you have come to Mount Zion, to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of angels,
To the general assembly and church of the first barn registered in heaven.
To God, the judge of all.
To the spirits of just men made perfect.
To Jesus, the mediator of the new covenant.
To the blood of sprinkling that speaks more eloquently than that of evil.
This is the great cloud of witnesses by whom we are surrounded.
the spirits of just men made perfect.
We came here this morning, my brothers and sisters, to join ourselves to this congregation of the spirits of just men made perfect, the innumerable company of the just, the angels who sing in heaven.
They surround us in our worship.
We don't just come here to do that.
In fact, we do that when we pray at home.
We got up this morning,
turned toward the east as the early Christians did.
Made your first prayer to God.
You were already placing yourself within the great cloud of witnesses.
You've been praising God all night long.
The angels who sing his praises around the clock.
These are elders in the faith because it is from them that we receive the tradition and the loving culture by which we are defined as the church.
Now, this evening, submitting ourselves to this tradition, we're going to gather here at Vespers and begin our Lenten fast together.
The Lenten fast is not a private fast.
We keep it observed.
If it were a private fast, we'd be keeping it privately.
Not a private fast.
It's the fast of the church.
We're going to be a fasting wife.
Why are we fast during these 40 days of Lenten?
Those who are getting ready for baptism.
Find that already.
Even St. Paul, remember St. Paul spends a three day fast before he's baptized in the book of Acts.
Since the end of the first century, before the year 100, the Christian church has preserved a period of fasting.
Prepare for those who are going to be baptized.
Why are we going to be fasting during these next 45 days?
We're going to be fasting for grace.
for Mark, for Ming.
During these next 40 days, there are all going to be baptized at Posca, these three, in our parish.
And of course, other parishes around the world.
We'll be praying exorcisms over them.
There'll be any special instruction to prepare for baptism.
We're going to receive them into our midst.
One can think of the 40-day fast as the birth pangs.
We're giving birth to three new Christians.
We're going to pray and fast because they've come now to accept the tradition of the church.
They're going to submit their lives and hand over their lives to the authority of the church through which they receive their identity as disciples of Christ our Lord.
Homilies from All Saints, with Father Pat Reardon, pastor of All Saints Orthodox Church in Chicago, and senior editor of Touchstone Magazine.
This has been a presentation of Ancient Faith Radio.